                                                         TROJAN FOUNDATION


Money has to undergo a metamorphosis again, it has to relinquish its role in the market economy and engage in an economy of capacities. Then we would come full circle, since each human being can then act within his company as co-creator of the future, can - in full dignity - contribute to shaping this future. No area of life will be free from this concept in the future. That means that people will recognize the social organism, and they must think within this context. They must also think about economic structures. They must always think through the entire social organism. 

-Joseph Beuys, artist(1923-1986)



Art is an organism with its own reason for being, a virus subverting its host's replicating mechanisms so as to spread its agenda. It carves out spaces where can experience the transformation of what we can be to each other, and do for each other. It generates value that circulates within and between communities, and it refuses the dictated roles of the imposed order of dept-value.

Durning the long years of austerity artistic practices have, due to disinvestment and lack of resources, developed in the sphere of informal, non-market, social production - involving systems of exchange, cooperative networks, distributed knowledge, and collective activities out of nessecity. A field that is incompatible and potentially threatening to the symbolic and fiscal cohesion of "high culture", that holds on tightly to a notion of "cultural" capital and it's tight regulation. A capital generated only by certain centers of art industry power - "gatekeeper" international galleries and major museums. From the standpoint of Athens, the TROJAN FOUNDATION envisions a shift away from centralised models of cultural production, towards a new hierarchy of priorities based upon sustainable cultural practices and participatory, inclusive and horizontal models. Seeking counter-narratives to the increasing financialization of the cultural field, we trace the radical points of intersection with the practices of others from the global community, who are also working from within and outside existing institutional framings, and whose locally focused work constitute de-facto deflections from accepted paradigms within the globally established art economy. The TROJAN FOUNDATION imagines a new form of cultural "institution" that can be flexible, open, responsive, transparent and governed democrartically.


The art market is exceptional among other global industries in that it has, up to now at least, avoided the effects of the global financial  crash of 2008 and its aftershocks, which continue to reverberate through social and political institutions almost a decade later. In fact, it has since prospered: There is a boom in art museum building and auction sales for contemporary art continue to rise. The art market has shown itself to be immune to financial collapse, not least because it has become a useful place to hedge investments, using the money pumped into the system by “quantative easing.”   

Seemingly insulated against the effects of the social and financial crisis, the cultural industry has simultaneously been restructured to serve the interests of centralized finance capital. While art markets boom as financial markets crash, investors now look to art as an international currency, openly referring to art as an asset class, a fungible “hedge”, with the goal to enable it to cross borders as easily as the dollar, the euro, or the yen. As architectural historian David Joselit recently suggested, a new global wave of museum construction seems to “function as the art world’s central banks”. Those who control wealth shape cultural production.

As a result, big capital has turned the global contemporary art market into one of the largest deregulated transaction platforms in the world, a space where oligarchs launder money, real estate tycoons decorate private museums for tax benefits, and celebrities trade cash for credibility. Public cultural institutions have become primarily economic institutions subject to the demands of the market. The expectations of ever-increasing success and economic growth not only generate exploitative working conditions but also jeopardize the possibility of the existing institutions to provide the necessary spaces for critical action and artistic experimentation.
